
## Assignment 3 - Type of Inquiry

The Middle East and African regions face a critical lack of procured census data, which clouds essential patterns that can explain and predict the relationship between external factors and human movement. To address this gap in information, I propose the central research question: Within the context of population shifts in the Middle East and Africa, what is the impact of political crises such as terrorism, government instability, or climate change? This central research question trends toward an explanatory inquiry; it seeks to identify causes and effects in order to understand patterns in migratory behavior. In particular, this inquiry aims to explain the processes that determine a location’s propulsiveness to understand systematic patterns in migratory behavior. Causal relationships in human migration bring light to domestic and international push-pull factors, specifically the relationship between observed political events and migratory data.

This central research question expands further to address its inverse: Can shifts in demography serve as indicators to predict the insurgence of a crisis event? The sub-research question yields itself to a causal or predictive puzzle inquiry, as it explores the influence of particular factors on larger themes and seeks to explain the observed phenomenon of human migration with a multilateral approach. The second sub-research question aids the broader research question: How can current migratory and climate data predict the long-term migratory effects that the Middle East and Africa see as a result of global warming, and how might this give rise to political and economic conflict? The gravity-type spatial interaction model and hierarchical Bayesian modeling framework that accounts for uncertainty combines to address each question. 
