## Human Development & Data Science Knowledge Creation

Data science reveals underling order and extraordinary simplicity, despite our perception that the universe contains an unquantifiable infiniteness. The nature of human innovation has long been characterized by the advent of remarkable and unexpected inventions—Alexander Fleming created penicillin by accident, the Slinky’s original purpose was to monitor power on battleships. Each accidental advancement in human thriving links to repetition and vast quantity. Through trials, errors, and pattern recognition, data science advances our understanding of complex adaptive, economic, and social systems with its ability to quantitatively describe complexity and diversity. Uncertainty characterizes complex adaptive systems, but data science serves to elucidate the unknown through scaling relationships, predictive precursors to human development, contextualization, careful analysis, and adaptive models.

In Amartya Sen’s book, Development as Freedom, the celebrated economist discusses the presence of unfreedoms as a hindrance to development. Consider that freedom and representation exist in an inextricable entanglement; states cannot improve the wellbeing of a population without an accurate measurement of where the population suffers. Accurate response to human development hindrances cannot arise without an understanding of a population’s complex nature. Geoff West theorizes that data science provides new insights into the underlying patterns of complex systems with scaling relationships that can quantitatively describe now a measurable characteristic scale with size. West’s ambitious hypothesis proports that data science can reveal relationships analogous with biology. He seeks to explain life expectancy, energy and entropy, cities and global sustainability, and business through scaling relationships. A remarkable amount of seemingly sporadic and unpredictable growth follows scaling relationships to a staggering accuracy. Every two months, the equivalent of a New York metropolitan area appears, and our social metabolic rate explains the amount of energy needed to support a human through scale.

Through the search for regularities, commonalities, principles, and universalities, we have witnessed significant gains in our ability to describe, analyze, and predict the human development process. Hans Rosling and Joshua Blumenstock further describe the promises and pitfalls in the advancement of data science in relation to human development. Rosling outlines a chronology of the relationship between development indicators and wealth. He presents rules and exceptions to the preconceived notions about the developing world by extrapolating hard-to-reach data and condensing it into geographic regions. In this way, Rosling transforms the largely subjective and unquantifiable observations about human development into a comprehensive analytical process. Rosling finds several development indicators that are precursors to wealth—access to demanded resources, lower child mortality rates, social change to a market economy, and, most recently, Internet users per capita. 

Several development indicators predict an upturn in domestic wealth, but Rosling highlights the relationship between health and wealth as the most important factor in a country’s sustainable development. Rosling urges a simple rule: health before wealth. Countries that prioritize economic wellbeing over domestic health may see short-term economic growth, but ultimately fall into a “middle-income trap” when their human capital can no longer provide manufacturing jobs at low wages. In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the international community has lauded states that imposed strict measures to improve domestic health at the short-term expense of the economy. On the contrary, countries that prioritized economic reopening over stable domestic health, such as Trump’s United States and Bolsonaro’s Brazil, have suffered in both the economic and health sectors. 

Joshua Blumenstock presents an antithesis to the argument that data science presents a holy grail of understanding human populations with his request for a humbler data science. Big data promises a rapid means of distributing resources, but developers must consider two factors; local context and their susceptibility to data misrepresentation, and the impact of machine error. The widespread implementation of data science in human development responses reveals salient harms and potential obstacles, namely in comparing the efficacy and the efficiency of data science. Data science algorithms can quickly determine information about population sets and subsets, but the algorithm’s reliability is an imperative quality to its successful implementation in accurately understanding complex systems and their development needs. Chris Anderson presents that idea that “the data deluge makes the scientific method obsolete” by enabling an empiricist mode of knowledge production, but there exist obstacles in populations where data is difficult or impossible to procure. 

Data science can elevate our understanding of individual community scale behavior on a large scale, but its applications in understanding micro-sections of a population present a larger scope of obstacles. Namely, on a small scale, a small margin of error has greater consequences. Chris Anderson refutres the idea that correlation does not equal causation, and instead argues that massive data transcends the idea that theory must come before conclusion. Gene sequencing presents one of the most complex biological systems in the world. Shotgun gene sequencing represents a significant gain in our ability to explain complex systems—it uses supercomputers to analyze entire ecosystems and find undiscovered gene sequences. Massive data processing has applications in analyzing the scalable and non-scalable relationships of both biological and human-created processes. 

However, Rob Kitchin argues that, despite its enticing applications, the complexity of these massive data sets warrants careful analysis before collection. Kitchin cites the example of inaccuracies in government census data because of its poorly planned scope as a primary reason why data science cannot separate theory and analysis. Data science can only begin to ameliorate unfreedoms when the evaluation of the data is accurate. Hierarchical Bayesian modelling explores a means by which to account for uncertainty in population data. Despite the exciting prospect of using data science methods such as gravity-type spatial interaction models, neural networks, and call data records (CDRs) to accurately understand complex populations, data scientists must evaluate expected errors and irregularities. In order to obtain sufficient usable conclusions from data, Big Data must learn to handle its own abundance and exhaustivity.

Owen Barder details the history of data science to explain economic models, which ties in with West’s emphasis on using data science to identify scaling relationships in cities and businesses. Barder explains the Harrod-Domar growth Model, Walter Rostow’s idea of development as a virtuous cycle, Robert Solow’s Neoclassical growth theory, and the Washington Consensus, which all attempted to link economic growth and economic development to quantifiable processes. As with Kitchin’s call for certainty and Blumenstock’s call for a humbler data science, Barder explains the “missing ingredients” of data analysis as an endogenous obstacle to certainty—the system itself contains irregularities that impair accurate conclusions. Barder presents the economy and society as a complex adaptive system composed of co-evolving adaptive agents. Complex adaptive systems are difficult or impossible to predict in detail, but the advent of data science presents the first step to make broad-brush predictions about the system’s current and emerging properties and patterns. 

Scientific discovery presents a cyclical process—an emerging method promises to quantify a seemingly impossible characteristic of complex adaptive systems, then further analysis reveals its inaccuracies and obstacles. Science searches for regularities in a highly irregular system; it inherently asks for trouble. This desire to find an analogous hidden order in the midst of vast complexity and diversity reveals the true promise of data science. Its obstacle is its promise; evolving data science elucidates the irregularities of complex systems while it reveals further unanswered questions. 
