Anna Glass

DATA 150 Evolving Solutions

Professor Frazier

19 October 2020 

Word Count: 2,401

## Freedom as Representation: Spatially Disaggregated Population Estimates and Hierarchical Bayesian Models for Improved National Census Data in Africa and the Middle East

by Anna Glass

### Introduction & Abstract

In Amartya Sen’s book, *Development as Freedom*, the celebrated economist discusses the presence of unfreedoms as a hindrance to development. Across the world, failing governments systemically deny civil rights and political liberties to citizens.[1] Consider that freedom and representation exist in an inextricable entanglement; states cannot improve the wellbeing of a population without an accurate measurement of where the population suffers. The national census represents a vital—yet often unobtainable—dataset that impacts the livelihood of underrepresented citizens on the ground level. In areas where geospatial data remains unreliable or infrequent, data scientists have turned to spatially disaggregated population estimates. States stricken with war and poverty, particularly those in the African and Middle Eastern regions, suffer from a critical lack of information. In Lebanon, the most recently enumerated census data comes from 1932. In Somalia, the only public census occurred in 1975.[2] Political instability and civil unrest preclude census takers from performing their research, and corrupt governments may block the release of procured data. Further, reliable census data allows for increased government responsiveness on the domestic and international levels. When domestic instability inhibits the procuring and implementation of census-driven conclusions, government-collected macro-census data is no longer sustainable. With a significant correlation between lack of accurate population data and poor realization of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), it is in the interest of independent organizations to pursue alternative methods of national surveyance.

A considerable and recurrent foundation of high-resolution, cross-tabulate, contextualized population data is a prerequisite for the attainment of improved Human Development Indicators (HDIs). On the micro-level, accurate population datasets have implications for tracking migratory patterns, dissemination of disease, and government responsiveness in low- and middle-income countries. Synthetic population data provides a realistic opportunity for researchers to obtain data concerning households and associated characteristics. Previous studies have implemented iterative proportional fitting (IPF) combined with combinatorial optimization procedures, specifically simulated annealing, to improve the probability distribution of attributes on the person and household census levels.[3] Accurate spatial distribution data, obtained through spatial covariates, satellite remote-sensing technologies, and dasymetric mapping techniques can coalesce to form a single body of applicable census data. In particular, “bottom-up” mapping methods, which incorporate ancillary spatial datasets, refine estimates of human population distribution at an enhanced resolution. Before low- and middle-income countries can achieve human thriving, it is crucial to obtain representation for all sections and subsections of the population. Microcensus and simulated datasets advance the prospect of generating multiple scenarios for future census data, allowing state and international actors to formulate plans in advance of population shifts.[4] This goal remains far-reaching, simulated population datasets broaden the applications of accurate census data.

### Themes, Topics, Processes, & Methods

#### Understanding Human Migration 

Quantifying and modeling human migration addresses changing flows in economic development, urban and regional development, and resource allocation—key variables that influence push-pull factors of migration. Infrequent census data inhibits the domestic and international study of migration. Each census collection captures the current state of the population, while frequent census microdata increases the efficacy with which researchers and government agencies can respond to changes in population distributions. Gravity-type spatial interaction models have applications in the past and future—they can explain migratory patterns and predict future within-country migration to a staggering accuracy. Andres Garcia and his team aim to understand the driving factors behind migration in Sub-Saharan Africa by modeling internal migration flows in sub-regions that remain poorly quantified. He addresses the critical lack of migratory data on the regional level—national migratory data is more widely available, but does not record the nuances of within-region migratory patterns. Census microdata provides high-resolution, anonymized samples of national census data and allows for a more robust model of migration in underrepresented regions.[5]

Coherent with large-scale spatially disaggregated population datasets, the gravity-type spatial interaction models (GTSIM) incorporates datasets from population sizes at each microcensus location. The model uses the distance between population concentrations to evaluate which location characteristics contribute to within-country migration, distancing itself from previous methods that correlated population with a location’s propulsiveness.[6]  Amy Wesolowski delves into the application of census migration data to estimate human movement patterns across temporal scales.[7] National census migration data fails to capture the shorter-scale migration patterns, including seasonal relocations or movements lasting less than one year. Improved census data using spatial interaction models can reveal relationships between individuals and the economy, government, and environment. Although national census data acts as a proxy for shorter-term movements, mobile phone usage data expands the analytical breadth of a highly sensitive dataset. Call data records (CDRs) can create a microcensus that combats this critical gap in information with high-resolution, contextualized coordinates to compare with formal census data. In addition to quantifying general regional movement, CDRs construct an empirical density distribution using the Euclidean distance between countries to quantify their ranking as source countries and destination countries.[8]

With this analysis of both intra-country and intercountry movement, microcensus data combined with CDRs widens the scope and frequency of migration over time and allows for distance comparison. Though these models seemingly capture a habitual, accurate delineation of population patterns, there exist crude elements of both methods. Garcia’s employment of the gravity-type spatial interaction models represents a step forward but requires severe contextualization. The push-pull factors within a region remain heavily individualized and difficult to quantify on a large scale without the implementation of survey data alongside mapping. Consider that improved conditions, typically associated with industrialization, lead to higher costs of living. In this case, migratory “push” factors may be an indication of improved HDIs despite the appearance that the location deters residents. Similarly, Wesolowski’s study requires verification that the usage of cell phone data does not introduce confounding variables. Individuals that regularly engage with cell phone towers represent a wealthier subsection of the population in areas where mobile phone usage remains uncommon. Thus, the data cannot apply to the population as a whole.

#### Disease Tracking and Prevention
	
As countries around the world approach the eradication of infectious diseases such as malaria, they must anticipate disease reintroduction through the internal and international movement of people. Human-mediated parasite mobility represents a dangerous inhibiting factor in the elimination of disease. The current state of census-based migration data lacks an involved understanding of short-term movements. Two major methods fill the gap in data related to human movement: Long-term census data and mobile phone data. Population data collected through CDRs informs areas that likely import or export infected people, allowing for proactive policy to prevent further spread of the disease. Despite the prevalent use of short-term movement data to track migration, long-term migration data can prove useful in predicting the relative flows of infected people.[9] Predictive models of the migration have applications in predicting areas of high disease importation, which informs malaria elimination policy, surveillance, and treatment strategies. Predicted population data must account for the duration, frequency, and spatial scale of movement. Nick Ruktanonchai integrates census data and migration-oriented data to fill gaps in predicted human movement.[10] His study compares the relative efficacy of census microdata and mobile phone call record data, with a focus on the first-level administrative units of Mesoamerica. Countries in Mesoamerica have seen declines in Malaria cases of >9% per year from 2000 to 2011. This status lends the region to either complete disease elimination or disease reintroduction. 

Ruktanonchai incorporates logistic regression models to compare both data sets, which determine movement patterns with unique sets of covariates. Regional incidence estimates and country-specific analyses combine to inform regional incidence estimates. The presented logistic regression model predicts the proportion of the population from one geographical unit who moved to another per time step. Covariates include the distance between administrative unit centroids, whether a unit pair is contagious, origin, destination, and the total population.[11] Elisabeth Erbach-Schoenberg addresses the crucial need for reliable health metrics to assess disease burden. The study measures seasonal changes in health district population numbers using 3.5 years of phone data to determine the seasonal mobility of malaria in Namibia. Seasonal mobility can lead to a 30% difference in malaria incidence estimates, exhibiting clear spatial patterns that malaria incidence estimates trend toward underestimation in lower-risk areas and overestimation in the high-risk zones. Erbach-Schoenberg combines regional population projections from each administrative unit within a health district, and refers to the projected population numbers as ‘static denominators.’ The resulting data set tracks malaria cases in Namibia spanning 43 months and aggregates the scale of months to align with the malaria case data. Covariates include the relative density of users in a health district and the density of the administrative unit. 

Both studies aim to quantify non-projected census counts using predictive models or supplementary data on human mobility; each presents a unique set of promises and pitfalls. The algorithms in Ruktanonchai’s study utilize weighted graphs—combining predicted flow values with a symmetrized adjacency matrix—to predict the total flow between two units in either direction. Over many iterations, the predicted flow adapts administrative regions to reflect the subcommunities that most often commingle. Information concerning such interactions reforms the coordination of effort across administrative units. However, predictive models using long-term census gives rise to a fatal misunderstanding of seasonal migrations. In this respect, Erbach-Schoenberg’s study provides a clear data set with which to compare predictive models. The synthesis of census data, mobile phone CDRs, and predictive population models reveals a promising future for communicable disease eradication. 

### Human Development Process and Geospatial Methods

A foundation of microcensus data, simulated annealing, and analysis of CDRs is necessary to understand and further population-focused Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), including Goal 1: No Poverty, Goal 3: Good Health and Well-being, Goal 8: Decent Work and Economic Growth, and Goal 11: Sustainable Cities and Communities. Within the complex adaptive system of human development, adequate information is vital to gain a realistic understanding of spatially diverse population demographics. Simulated population data and alternative census collection methods reveal a panacea for representation in demography. National and international demography informs policy and government resource allocation, advancing social welfare programs and institutional response to natural disasters and disease. Missteps in the domain of preserving human life can prove fatal. Thus, the confounding variable of uncertainty proves the largest hindrance to the full implementation of national population mapping using sparse survey data. Hierarchical Bayesian modeling framework accounts for uncertainty in predictive population mapping, which progresses the proposed methods from theory to execution.[12] The hierarchical Bayesian model combines neighborhood-scale microcensus surveys in Nigeria with national-scale satellite imagery. 

Douglas Leasure’s study combines the development goals of the United Nations Population Division’s annual projection models and disaggregate population totals realized through satellite imagery and geospatial data to develop uncertainty intervals for past population estimates. Bayesian statistics can customize models for microcensus and other population data to account for complex relationships such as non-Gaussian error distribution—a probability distribution of random error that does not follow a normal distribution—or random effects and observer error. Concerning reducing uncertainty, three geospatial covariates had significant positive effects: WorldPop gridded population estimates, school densities, and household sizes. Conversely, residential area, total settled area, and nonresidential settlement had insignificant effects on the confidence interval.[13] Dana R. Thomson concludes that, in order to adopt gridded population survey data in human development policy, the methods must feasibly be able to be implemented across diverse settings and account for cell-level accuracy.[14]

The emerging field of gridded population survey sampling in low- and middle-income countries depends on precise survey sampling methods to have the intended wide-scale effect on policy. Multi-temporal, high-resolution, globally consistent population datasets promote mapping heterogeneous demographics in sub-national populations. Emerging methods aim to harmonize an archive of geospatial datasets across large spatial areal units by representing the population as a continuous surface as opposed to arbitrary administrative boundaries. Such transitions in data expression create a vast swath of national population data that federal governments can employ during deliberations surrounding national policy.[15] In order for spatially disaggregated population estimates to become a viable population dataset for governmental and non-governmental organizations alike, survey developers must scrutinize and adapt census estimation methods in an iterative process. 

### Conclusion

Complexity plays an intrinsic role in advancing our understanding of human development. Owen Barder describes development as a characteristic of a political, social, and economic system that enlarges people’s capabilities and freedoms. Data science reveals a deep analytical level that allows a firm to both explain and predict changes in human development and sustainability.[16] The presence of mass data and pattern recognition using algorithms spurs our understanding of changing wellness within a complex developmental system. Data analysts explain shifts in datasets relating to human wellness in order to create models for human thriving or downfall. The field shifts the observational study of human and systemic wellbeing to a methodical process that yields evidence of substantial development. Accurate population data in particular encompasses the value of freedom as representation. Representation—and person-oriented policymaking in general—reflect a precursor of freedom, and by extension a precursor of development.

My exploration of improved national census data began with a broader topic of housing as it relates to human development indicators. I researched the economic wellbeing of women in Nepal by analyzing socioeconomic indicators through geospatial data, the relationship between quality housing and the spread of malaria in Sub-Saharan Africa, linking synthetic populations to household geolocations in Namibia, estimating population in the absence of national housing census data, and mapping changes in Sub-Saharan African housing by measuring housing unfreedoms. Through this exploration, I found the greatest gap in information in the procuring of national and sub-national census data. Accurate national census data yields itself to the advancement of understanding migratory patterns and disease prevention. However, there exists a severe gap in the literature regarding accounting for uncertainty. Although data science methods increasingly account for demographic heterogeneity, further research is necessary to account for drastic and unforeseen population shifts. In its current state, synthetic population datasets can generate multiple scenarios to test future census data, but lack the necessary degree of accuracy to inform policymaking and generate plans for development in advance of population changes. Asking data scientists to account for unexpected, disruptive events is a tall order. However, it is crucial to answer strategic questions regarding crisis events and their relationship to population shifts. For that reason, I propose two central research questions. 1) Within the context of population shifts in the Middle East and Africa, what is the impact of political crises such as terrorism, government instability, or climate change? 2) Can shifts in demography serve as indicators to predict the insurgence of crisis events?

### References

[1]	Sen, A. (2019). Development as freedom. MTM.

[2]	Wardrop, N. A., Jochem, W. C., Bird, T. J., Chamberlain, H. R., Clarke, D., Kerr, D., … Tatem, A. J. (2018, April 3). Spatially disaggregated population estimates in the absence of national population and housing census data. PNAS. http://www.pnas.org/content/115/14/3529.

[3]	Thomson, D. R., Kools, L., & Jochem, W. C. (2018, August 9). Linking Synthetic Populations to Household Geolocations: A Demonstration in Namibia. MDPI. http://www.mdpi.com/2306-5729/3/3/30.

[4]	Thomson, D. R., Kools, L., & Jochem, W. C. (2018, August 9). Linking Synthetic Populations to Household Geolocations: A Demonstration in Namibia. MDPI. http://www.mdpi.com/2306-5729/3/3/30.

[5]	Garcia, A. J., Pindolia, D. K., Lopiano, K. K., & Tatem, A. J. (2014, August 4). Modeling internal migration flows in sub-Saharan Africa using census microdata. Migration Studies. https://academic.oup.com/migration/article/3/1/89/2413406.

[6] Garcia, A. J., Pindolia, D. K., Lopiano, K. K., & Tatem, A. J. (2014, August 4). Modeling internal migration flows in sub-Saharan Africa using census microdata. Migration Studies. https://academic.oup.com/migration/article/3/1/89/2413406.

[7]	Wesolowski, A., Buckee, C. O., Pindolia, D. K., Eagle, N., Smith, D. L., Garcia, A. J., & Tatem, A. J. (2013, January 9). The Use of Census Migration Data to Approximate Human Movement Patterns across Temporal Scales. PLOS ONE. https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371%2Fjournal.pone.0052971. 

[8]	Wesolowski, A., Buckee, C. O., Pindolia, D. K., Eagle, N., Smith, D. L., Garcia, A. J., & Tatem, A. J. (2013, January 9). The Use of Census Migration Data to Approximate Human Movement Patterns across Temporal Scales. PLOS ONE. https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371%2Fjournal.pone.0052971. 

[9]	C. Ohrt, K. W. R., CJ. Murray, K. F. O., Z. Chisha, D. A. L., G. Zhou, Y. A. A., T. Bousema, J. T. G., E. Tambo, L. A., … Y-A. Montjoye, C. A. H. (2016, October 12). Dynamic denominators: the impact of seasonally varying population numbers on disease incidence estimates. Population Health Metrics. https://pophealthmetrics.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12963-016-0106-0. 

[10] S. Bhatt, D. J. W., CJ. Murray, L. C. R., JM. Cohen, D. L. S., AJ. Tatem, D. L. S., P. Martens, L. H., ST. Stoddard, A. C. M., … Sevilla-Casas, E. (1970, January 1). Census-derived migration data as a tool for informing malaria elimination policy. Malaria Journal. https://malariajournal.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12936-016-1315-5.

[11] S. Bhatt, D. J. W., CJ. Murray, L. C. R., JM. Cohen, D. L. S., AJ. Tatem, D. L. S., P. Martens, L. H., ST. Stoddard, A. C. M., … Sevilla-Casas, E. (1970, January 1). Census-derived migration data as a tool for informing malaria elimination policy. Malaria Journal. https://malariajournal.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12936-016-1315-5. 

[12] Leasure, D. R., Jochem, W. C., Weber, E. M., Seaman, V., & Tatem, A. J. (2020, September 29). National population mapping from sparse survey data: A hierarchical Bayesian modeling framework to account for uncertainty. PNAS. https://www.pnas.org/content/117/39/24173. 

[13] Leasure, D. R., Jochem, W. C., Weber, E. M., Seaman, V., & Tatem, A. J. (2020, September 29). National population mapping from sparse survey data: A hierarchical Bayesian modeling framework to account for uncertainty. PNAS. https://www.pnas.org/content/117/39/24173. 

[14] Thomson, D. R., Rhoda, D. A., Tatem, A. J., & Castro, M. C. (2020, September 9). Gridded population survey sampling: a systematic scoping review of the field and strategic research agenda. International Journal of Health Geographics. https://ij-healthgeographics.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12942-020-00230-4. 

[15] Lloyd, C. T., Chamberlain, H., Kerr, D., Yetman, G., Pistolesi, L., Stevens, F. R., … Tatem, A. J. (2019, June 18). Global spatio-temporally harmonised datasets for producing high-resolution gridded population distribution datasets. Taylor & Francis. https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/20964471.2019.1625151.

[16] Barder, O. (2012, August 15). The Implications of Complexity for Development. Center For Global Development. https://www.cgdev.org/media/implications-complexity-development-owen-barder. 
