# Owen Barder Development & Complexity Response

### 1. How does Owen Barder define development? How does he extend Amartya Sen's definition to include the idea of complexity?

  Owen Barder expands upon Amartya Sen’s definition of development by first presenting the part of Sen’s definition with which he agrees. Development is the characteristic of enlarging people’s capabilities and freedoms with the ultimate goal of the attainment of a long and healthy life of knowledge and adequate living standards. He elaborates on this development, shifting the definition of development as a characteristic of the political, social, and economic system, not simply the well-being of people within that system. He creates an analogy between Thomas Thwaites’ toaster project and societal institutions to explain that development encompasses not just the individual, but the array of technologies and parts that create a system of wellbeing for the population. Barder also includes a typical definition of development as presented by economists: development is the sum of the effects on individuals and firms in the economy. In this way, Barder includes an economic and institutional lens to Amartya Sen’s definition, which reflects the complexity of development and its relationship with the world outside of the individual level.

### 2. Who was Thomas Thwaites and what was his "toaster project"?  Was he successful? What is the significance of this example in the context of Barder's talk about complexity and development?

  Thomas Thwaites was a British design student who decided that he would try to make an electric toaster from scratch. He attempted to manufacture all of the parts required to make a toaster from raw materials and a model of a dismantled toaster. Thomas Thwaites’ success remains subjective. He succeeded in building a working toaster, but it took him nine months and a hefty cost—several times more than the model toaster, priced at £3.94—and the toaster burst into flames five seconds after he plugged it in. By his own definition, Thomas Thwaites considered this a “partial success.” Thomas Thwaites’ toaster project illustrates the necessity of having an intricate system of government that can transport goods, enforce contracts, and provide capital. It is impossible to achieve development efficiently and sustainably without institutions that specialize in each facet of a functioning society. Development requires the precursor of institutional interworkings to provide the necessary goods and services that one individual cannot produce for themselves. 

### 3. Barder compared the economic growth of South Korea and Ghana between 1960 and 2010. Why was this example instructive as part of his talk?  What did this comparison demonstrate when used as the basis to validate (or invalidate) economic models?

  In Barder’s discussion of the Harrod-Domar growth model, he includes the example of South Korea and Ghana to invalidate its claim that economic growth and economic development are synonymous. The Harrod-Domar growth model presents the idea that to produce a unit of output, a firm must combine a certain amount of capital and a certain amount of labor. Barder asserts that this model remains too simplistic to reflect reality, the example of South Korea and Ghana does not align with the idea that capital and labor combine to create economic output. Despite having a similar income per person in 1960, South Korea grew much faster than Ghana despite having similar constraints on human and material capital. In the late 1970s, incomes in South Korea augmented while they remained stagnant in Ghana, indicating that income per person provides a more accurate model of intrastate economic development. South Korea saw a significant correlation between the rapid increase in income per person and developments in the quality of life. Robert Solow, who introduced the neoclassical growth model, accounts for this third variable of development, technical change.

### 4. What was the Harrod-Domar model? What are the two fundamental variables in this model? Who was Walter Rostow and what the impact of his work on development?  Was the Harrod-Domar model effective at predicting development outcomes?

  The Harrod-Domar growth model was a simple economic model created by economists after World War II. The two fundamental variables in this model were the amount of capital and the amount of labor in society. The Harrod-Domar growth model presented a view of domestic economics as a combination of the two key factors, capital and labor. It assumed that, because developing countries had a wide supply of labor, their economic constraint lied in the amount of capital they possessed. The Harrod-Domar model did not reflect reality or account for the nuanced idea of economic development as distinguished from economic growth. Although the simple model was appealing, it did not present a useful tool for predicting development outcomes. Alternatively, Walter Rostow published *The Stages of Economic Growth,* which presented development as a virtuous circle, where a rise in investment would lead to subsequent rises in capital stock, output, income, savings, and eventually more investment. He theorized that if a developing nation received a 5 to 10 percent increase in their national income, it would launch the country into self-sustained growth. His model provided much of the rationale for the surge of foreign aid in the 1960s and 1970s.
  
### 5. What was the Robert Solow model and how did it address the limitations of the Harrod-Domar model? Was this model successful as predicting economic growth?

The Robert Solow model, now known as the neoclassical growth model, built upon the Harrod-Domar growth model by adding a third component on top of capital and labor constraints: technical change. The technical change variable provided an all-encompassing explanation for unexplained elements of economic development. Rather than a specific, material factor, the technical change aspect of the model represented a ‘manna from heaven’ that increases the output of a firm in an unexplained way. Robert Solow’s model addressed the inaccuracies and limitations of the Harrod-Domar growth model with its more comprehensive approach to explaining economic growth. However, the Robert Solow model cannot predict economic change. Because the element of technical change is vague, the model can only explain the history of economic development over time. Solow’s model does explain the divergence between wealthy countries and poor countries, but cannot target a specific mechanism of economic divergence that holds over time. 

### 6. What was the Washington Consensus? How did it propose to improve upon models of economic growth?

The Washington Consensus was a response to the failed models of economic growth. Economists began to argue that the existing economic models predicted the potential economic development of a firm, but policy failures prevented the realization of theoretical economic growth. International institutions such as the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund responded to this criticism with a series of policy reforms, which were met with varying degrees of success. Sub-Saharan Africa brought down the public deficit and liberalized exchange rates, which improved the region’s economic performance, but many policy reforms failed to close the divergence between rich and poor countries on the industrialized world stage. Thus, economists often view the Washington Consensus as a failure. However, the consideration of policy as a factor of economic growth broadened the discussion surrounding economic development.

### 7. What was the Ajaokuta Steel Works? How did it illustrate the transition from a focus on policies to institutions?  How productive has the Nigerian steelworks proven to be?

The Adjaokuta Steel Works was a firm in Nigeria that received one of the largest investments in steel production in the world, costing more than five billion dollars. Despite high expectations for the firm’s output, the Nigerian steelworks have proven unproductive due to endemic corruption and poor management. Ajaokuta has failed to add to Nigeria’s national income because of intrinsic issues within the government institutions. This shifted the discussion of economic development from *policies* to *institutions.* Now, international aid focuses on institutional strengthening rather than the bolstering of firms themselves. 

### 8. Who was Haile Sellasie?  What is the significance of Kapuscinski's book the Emperor? How did Ethiopia exemplify the suppression of emergent systemic change? Do you agree with Barder's interpretation?

Owen Barder named his development and complexity talk after Ryszard  Kapuściński, the Polish author of The Emperor, a chronicle of the Emporer Haile Sellasie, the last of the feudal dynasty in Ethiopia, overthrown in 1974. Kapuściński’s book explains the dangerous system of feudalism and egoism— the Emperor Haile Sellasie suppressed emergent systemic changes because of the Emperor’s adverse reaction to criticism. He refused to hear and ameliorate the poverty and starvation in the Ethiopian countryside. This chronicles the harmful nature of institutions with internal logic, where decisions are largely top-down. I agree with Barder’s interpretation of the Ethiopian government before 1974. The presence of government systems such as democracy, which engineer decisions based on the needs of the constituents, lead to effective change free of bias from the elites. However, the process of democratization can be devastating for previously feudal or authoritarian regimes, because the checks and balances of a republican system often conflict with the personal interests of once all-powerful elites, leading to conflict.

### 9. Who was Steve Jones? What did he do at Uni-Lever? Was he successful? How significant were his results?

Steve Jones, a famous evolutionary biologist, brought massive improvements to the production of soap powder through an evolutionary, iterative process of developing random models and selecting the most efficient nozzle. Steve Joens simulated an evolutionary process with his development of a better nozzle. Instead of relying on fluid dynamics and theories about the manufacturing efficiency of the model, Steve Jones created ten random models, tested their efficiency, and built upon those models. By distorting these copies over forty-five generations, Steve Jones created a nozzle hundreds of times more efficient than the original nozzle. His results were significant and illustrated the value of adaptive change. 

### 10. What is the significance of Schumpeter's idea of creative destruction? How does it relate to firms and industries?

Schumpeter’s idea of creative destruction plays into the ideas of survival of the fittest and evolution through the lens of economics. Creative destruction distinguishes between firms adapting and industries adapting. When an industry adapts to the changing needs of the population, it avoids creative destruction. However, firms often fail to adapt to the current environment, such as Nokia, which once produced high-end phones in the telecommunications industry, but failed to adapt to the surging demand for smartphones. Firms and industries belong to a complex adaptive system that involves spontaneous rapid change. 

### 11. Why does Barder recommend resisting engineering as a policy implication? Does he suggest a different approach?  What did he mean by his use of the term, iso-morphic mimicry?

Barder recommends resisting engineering as a policy implementation because the process of engineering can rarely reflect solutions to complex adaptive systems. Specific improvements appear more rapidly through natural evolutionary change and adaptations. As he puts it, “evolutionary processes often outperform design.” Barder relates resist engineering back to Steve Jones, the evolutionary biologist behind the highly efficient soap nozzle, as an argument for relying on adaptive change rather than engineering. He suggests that instead of replacing evolutionary processes like command economies once did, firms should attempt to harness evolutionary processes. Iso-morphic mimicry is the condition where a developing country creates organizations that appear to function but are riddled with corruption and inefficiency instead of creating a functioning organization. Iso-morphic mimicry refers to the process where animals appear more dangerous than they actually are in order to deter predators. 

### 12. What did Barder mean by “resist fatalism”? Who was Norman Borlaug and what is the Green Revolution?

By “resist fatalism,” Barder means that firms and organizations are not confined to the outcome that the process of evolution gives us. Instead, we can harness evolution to accelerate and shape evolution to be the most efficient. He cites the example of Norman Borlaug and his Green Revolution. Norman Borlaug intervened in the evolutionary process and developed a high-yield, disease-resistant variety of wheat by crossbreeding and intentionally selecting high-performing varieties. This Green Revolution saved more than a billion people from starvation. Evolution should be harnessed and can become more efficient with strategic intervention. Barder argues that humans are not subject to the natural processes of the world, but instead an actor that can influence complex adaptive systems.
