## Human Development & Data Science Insight: Precision Medicine and Data Science

Precision medicine, an approach to disease prevention that accounts for a patient’s individual genomic profile, had expanded rapidly in the field of modern medical science. This approach allows doctors and pharmaceutical manufacturers to individualize drugs to factor in genes, environment, and lifestyle. Precision medicine reduces the risk of adverse side effects and ensures that the personalized medication will take effect with greater accuracy and less waste. With the expansion of this field comes the critical need for the accurate prediction of drug responsiveness in individual patient profiles. Standardized and automated analysis of patient and medicinal data presents a gateway for the efficient distribution of vital, individualized medications. 

Cai Huang, Roman Mezencev, John F. McDonald, and Fredrik Vannberg address this gap in data processing with an open source software platform that generates drug-specific models. This method combines a versatile support vector machine (SVM) algorithm and a recursive feature elimination (RFE) approach to analyze gene expression profiles and predict their responses to cancer medications. In its current state, the model can accurately predict drug responsiveness in 60 human cancer cell lines (NCI-60) designated by the National Center Institute. The methods primarily apply to later-stage degenerative diseases such as cancer, dementia, and Alzheimer’s. However, the field of precision medicine combined with data science can apply to short-term communicative diseases as the process of drug individualization becomes efficient.

In their analysis of genomic profiles, Huang’s team builds upon research in human genome sequencing, quantitative trait loci (QTI) mapping, and genome-wide association studies (GWAS). The first objective in the accurate implementation of the desired machine learning method is to understand the molecular pathways associated with human diseases. In this realm, the support vector machine (SVM) contains multiple, highly specialized categorizations for predicted drug response. Similar studies such as pRRocphetic and the Bioconductor package SCAN have allowed for single-sample array nominalization to target precision medication. Although these packages have brought advancements to the field, precision medicine has seen a staggering lack of shared code, which can provide datasets that catalyze machine learning applications in medicine. 

Huang’s study combats this gap in information by presenting an open source software platform that predicts cancer drug responses. Recent advancements in the software include greater predictive accuracy using microarray probe level expression data, individual arrays contained in a publicly accessible GitHub site, and the incorporation of a variety of cancer types. Predictive models are based primarily on a combination of SWM and RFE, which combine to narrow a large dataset with uninformative features to a subset of features using RFE. The SVM algorithm provides a large dataset with which the RFE can discard the least relevant features and, through an iterative process, provide a minimal subset of features that lead to optimal predictive accuracy in drug responsiveness.

From there, the SVM algorithm assigns a drug prediction score to each cell line, with scores over “0” indicating a sensitive response to a drug, while a score less than “0” indicates a predicted resistance to the drug. The predicted scores generated by the algorithm are then compared with observed GI50 values, which measure real-world drug responsiveness to cancer medication. The combination of precision medicine and data science addresses a critical need to optimize the prescription of cancer medications as quickly and accurately as possible. Current research shows promising advancements in the success of cancer treatments and reduction of adverse effects in cancer patients. 
